The topic was Arthur C. Clarke.
But before the panelists got ready to grapple with Clarke's work, Frederick Poeul volunteered
an explanation of Isaac Asimov's prolific output as a writer.
170 books published to date.
May I explain to you how come it is that Isaac has published so many books?
Because I know.
He's the only person I know who is physically addicted to having his fingers on a typewriter
keyboard.
If the keyboard is withdrawn for more than an hour and a half at a time, he begins to
go right up the wall.
You can see him now beginning to sweat and show withdrawal symptoms so that he likes
to type.
Well, that's true enough.
That's true enough.
I have published 170 books so far, all different varieties and stuff, and that's largely because
writing with a few insignificant and unmentionable exceptions, writing is all I want to do.
As a matter of fact, the way it's done is by not having anyone to help me.
I'm a one-man operation.
I have no secretary, no typist, no agent, no nothing.
I answer my own letters, answer my own telephone, do my own indexing, and so on.
And it's to that that I attribute the large output because if I had people working for
me first place, I couldn't possibly get them to work as long hours and as unquestioningly,
part of the genetic, and as unquestionably as I myself do.
We would do that.
As I myself do.
And secondly, if I had people helping me, I'd spend most of my time telling them what
to do and looking over what they did and discussing whether that's what ought to be done instead
of by saving all that time I write books.
Isaac, let me ask a very simple question.
I know you don't read much science fiction now.
You read some though.
Do you feel the same thrill when you come across a good science fiction story that you used
to feel?
Almost.
When I come across one that appeals to me and I must admit that lately it's been more
trouble something it used to be.
I got that thrill when I read Randeville with Rama.
Okay, fair.
And let's see, what was I recently read, a story that I liked very much and it's escaped
me.
But the trouble is that science fiction has changed easier.
I'm not saying it's a bad thing, but it's changed faster than my inside has.
And I find that it's difficult.
It hasn't changed.
There's still the basic core that hasn't changed that much.
What's happened is that it has developed all kinds of peripheral aspects.
Now a lot of people are writing things that are really fantasy and calling it science fiction.
They're also writing would-be mainstreams that they're calling.
They're sticking a little science fiction in in order to get it published.
They're publishing anti-science books and calling them science fiction.
But underneath it all there is, well Arthur C. Clarke, you mentioned Randeville with Rama.
Arthur C. Clarke is still writing Visually and he's done Imperial Earth recently.
Now I suspect that you and I as hardcore science fiction writers are not going to like that
as well as Randeville with Rama.
But I suspect that the general reader, the reader of Arthur's books is going to like
it perhaps even better because the characters are more important rather than the background
as it was in Randeville with Rama.
It's the story of the fifth centennial of the United States and a man who comes back
from space to help celebrate it and what he finds on Earth.
Isaac Asimov then gave his version of the Clarke Asimov Treaty with a little help from
Lester Del Rey.
You know the fact that science fiction writers, especially in the old days, knew each other
very well were friends as well as fellow writers.
Partly it's due to the fact that in writing there's none of this sense of competition.
You have many other professions.
In other words, there used not to be.
There is now.
Well, about now I don't know.
But in the old days, the fact that you sold the story didn't mean that someone else didn't
sell a story.
So there was no objection to being friendly, to helping each other out and so on.
You both sold stories.
Great.
It's still true.
Well, I hope so.
It's still true but nowadays people, there is a lot of competition.
And look, you and I and most of us when we first started in didn't really consider ourselves
big professional writers making a big career out of writing and so on.
We wrote the stuff because we wanted to write or because we loved it and we loved the money
on the top of it.
Yeah, we also liked to read each other's stories.
But that's it.
When a good story came in, we were so happy to see a good story that it didn't matter.
So we were all friends.
Now there's all kinds of things going on.
Well, I'm sorry for them.
Any case, among others, Arthur Clark is a good friend of mine and I remember once we
were writing down a taxi on Park Park Avenue and we formed what he calls the Clark-Azimov
Treaty of Park Avenue and I call it the Azimov-Clark Treaty of Park Avenue.
He said, and I do think it was he who suggested it first, but I fell in with it eagerly, he
said that whenever anyone was to ask me who was the best science fiction writer in the
world, I was to say Arthur C. Clark.
And whenever anyone asked him who was the best science writer in the world, he was to say
Isaac Azimov.
I've kept my part of the bargain and I'm sure he's kept his part of the bargain.
I'm not sure either one really believes it, you understand, because I think each one of
us secretly thinks he's first in both categories, but we stick to it.
As a matter of fact, talking about the Clark-Azimov Treaty, we are so similar in styles in some
way that people confuse us.
At least every once in a while I get someone who writes a letter to me and tells me how
much he liked my book, Childhood's End.
And that, of course, is Arthur Clark's great book, the one that sort of made him a fixture
in science fiction.
One of the hardwarming things you know about science fiction, one of the little inside
hardwarming things, is that if you're at a convention and somebody comes up to you with
a book that says, well, like Childhood and by Arthur Clark and says, you know, I badly
want Arthur's autograph, you will be nice and sign Arthur's name for it.
We all do this.
Gordon Dixon is most famous for his thematic science fiction novels, of which the Dorside
trilogy is the best known.
Mr. Dixon has won science fiction's two highest awards, The Hugo in 1965 for his short story,
Soldier Ask Not, and The Nebula in 1966 for his novelette, Call Him Lord.
His eagerly awaited fantasy novel, The Dragon and the George, will be published in paperback
by Ballantine this fall.
As a matter of fact, that was a bad example because Childhood's End is one I haven't
signed and I think it's because Childhood's End did something and I agree with you.
Arthur has written others that I rate a little higher on the scale, but Childhood's End has
a bittersweet touch about it that I would like to do someday and never have, although
I started out to do it sometime.
Arthur has two strains.
He has the very hard science strain and he has a mystical strain in his writing.
And Childhood's End, like 2001, has a heavy infusion of both.
It's probably what makes them popular.
It does not make them as popular with me, but it certainly makes them very popular.
Childhood's End is unquestionably recognized as the most popular of all Arthur's books.
I happen to think that his Earthlight, which has not apparently been discovered by a lot
of people, is actually a better book in many ways.
Earthlight really should be reissued more than it is.
I wish the people would discover what a good book it is.
Arthur's work can be very hard science fiction, but it also can have that mystical quality
to it.
He, there are touches of that in the earliest, close to the novel, he wrote, which was, what
was it, the, not the lad in the line, it was a story taking place in an ancient abandoned
city with a young boy going through it.
City and the Star, also known as, he published it twice under two different titles.
Under two different titles?
Yes.
More Hood Spa than any other writer I know.
Same book, slightly somewhat rewritten, published in two simultaneous editions under
two different titles.
I can't either.
It was a great book.
I have, I have, I have marked it immensely.
Clark has a reputation as a hard science writer, but what strikes me as most interesting
about his work is the color and invention of alien situations and surroundings and characters
in City and the Star.
And in his first novel, novelette, novella, rescue party, his first published story.
No, second.
I think it's first.
Second, I had, I thought the same thing until I was checking up recently for a book I'm
doing.
Arthur thinks it's the first because he complains bitterly when people say it's his best because
he likes to think that he's progressed since then.
New Pole was his first published one.
Maybe, but at any rate, one of his first.
And which I think is a fine story and it's, it's not the invention in it.
It's not the science in it.
It's the feeling you have of a whole group of cultures meeting and interacting on each
other in a way that's never happened in the world.
Yes.
Arthur was once accused and he hated it.
And yet there's an element of truth in it, of having a very pedestrian imagination.
I don't take that the way the writer meant it.
Arthur does have a pedestrian imagination, which is a great asset to a writer.
What he has is, he has an imagination.
And we've mentioned things about his imagination and sometimes it's quite free-wheeling.
But most of the time it is pedestrian in this sense that Arthur's imagination works step
by step by step by step so that he details everything.
He follows all the details except when he gets into a slightly mystical frame when he
goes off.
But his imagination and imaginary situations are detailed.
You know how many legs the chair has.
You know where the rungs are somehow in Arthur's stories.
Pedestrian is not a word I would apply to Arthur's.
I'm misusing the word deliberate.
There is a word that I would apply to it that's almost equally pejorative.
I think it's lucid.
What impresses me most about Clark as a writer is that I understand what he's trying to communicate
in every line.
Yes.
There's no obfuscation.
There's no playing around with words just for the sake of the sound of them.
Oh, what he is, he's very methodical in his thinking.
Very methodically.
He works everything out.
And this is what the other writer, the critic called Pedestrian, which is really unfair
in the usual meaning of the word.
Fitting terms on Arthur, I would have used the word three dimensional.
You remember in the fall of Moondust, the particular reality.
It gets the fall of night.
That was the other time.
I guess the fall of night, yeah.
That's right.
But in the fall of Moondust, when the people are buried under this dust, the scene is particularly
real because it's particularly solid.
The world which is now narrowed down to the inside of this little sightseeing bus really
has become a very hard world.
You can touch it.
Well, that's the trick that Arthur has.
Arthur measures his future without ever losing sight of the romance of it because he still
loves his futures.
He measures.
He knows just where everything is located.
And it's a strong asset.
This thoroughness, this methodical way with which he goes about making his imagination
real.
You'll notice, by the way, that science fiction does not get outmoded if it's good.
The fact that the Moondust surface is not dusty, as some people thought before the first
landing, does not make a fall of Moondust a bad story now.
In the same way, the fact that we can go around the world in 80 minutes doesn't at least
make around the world in 80 days a bad story.
That made it by itself.
Oh, I don't know.
I liked it.
The fact that you don't like something lest there is meaningless.
You don't like anything.
No, I love a great many things.
No, I don't like stock wooden characters.
I don't like bathos.
I don't like schlock development of a story.
I don't like where the furniture to show all over the place.
I don't like the big problem of a story solved by cheap trickery and a lot of other things,
all of which are typical of a shoot of air.
Well, this is not the place to argue Jules Vampe, but I have a feeling that he's going
to keep on going even when you and I are out.
But Lester Del Ray does have his likes as well.
I like a great many stories.
When Ursula Le Guin did Left Hand of Darkness, I jumped up and down and glee.
I read the story.
I reread the story immediately after reading it once, and I'll do that still to things.
There are great many stories that I drag off the shelf.
I drag off the Hell Clements stories periodically from the shelf.
The best of those.
Mission of Gravity, Cycle of Fire.
Cycle of Fire, particularly.
That's a magical thought.
There's a...
Cycle of Fire is the great underrated one of Clements.
It's really a splendid story with the best characters he ever did, the best human character
he ever did, and a marvelous alien character, a lovely cooperative conflict between the
two, a fantastically well-developed background, and a real problem behind it all.
I think perhaps his best story is from a technical point of view, and Ballantine published it.
I don't know how often has it been republished.
I can't remember.
I have no idea.
But it should have sold much better than it did, and it isn't as well appreciated.
I hope that they make a big splash for it sometime.
I'll be careful, Lester.
You're well known as the Kiss of Death.
I'd like to know who all, whether it's Hal himself or whether some university archives
have got this tremendous amount of stuff that he makes up before he ever starts writing.
All the dog gun, little notes from which he develops the solar system, from which he develops
the planet, from which he develops the continent, from which he develops the weather.
Some of that has been published, you know.
He did Mission of Gravity, I think.
He published an article in Astounding about what went into the writing of it.
He and Paul have recently put together a particular solar system and world or something.
Well, I'm not sure what you mean.
There is what's known as Harlan's world, which is the world that was invented for the purpose
of writing stories around at the UCLA conference.
This is something that they announced that they would both be using this.
They spoke out by Valentine called Fire Time by Pola Anderson, which uses this world.
I haven't seen any of Clement's work on this world yet.
I don't think he's actually publishing it.
But, well, you know, all of us to some extent do that.
I can't use Astoria faster than light travel without at least working out a theory to account
for it.
Or if I'm going slower than the speed of light, I very carefully work out the energy requirements
of the thing.
I have elaborate notes that used to take me days and days working on one of the things
now that I've got myself a lovely little calculator that will do all those things almost instantly.
It saves me a great deal of time.
But none of this ever goes into my story.
Clement and Arthur and so on put more of it into the story than I do.
I've got to know this before I feel comfortable in the world I've created.
I have to know this.
There are writers who get along beautifully without it.
I think one of my favorite science fiction writers of all time, Cordwayner Smith, never
once troubled his pretty little head about space drives.
What he was interested in describing was different kinds of societies.
But those he worked out in detail.
And he worked them out beautifully.
But the mechanics of how they came to be, he never really explained.
He didn't say how the spaceships managed to get from one planet to another in this immense
galaxy-wide culture that he dealt with.
He didn't really explain how the robot imitations of human beings existed or what the evolved
cat people and dog people.
But his little kitten goes into detail a little bit.
You think the mechanics of space drives are your right.
Fred, yours and mine, least regarded story, appeared in the same magazine with Cordwayner
Smith's first fantasy book number six, Had Little Man on the Subway by Isaac Asimov and
James McRae, who was you.
And then the same issue of this semi-pro magazine was Scanners Live in Vane by Cordwayner Smith.
For another eight years he didn't write anything.
For another eight years he didn't write anything because nobody happened to read that magazine,
which had a circulation of four.
Well, didn't you get into writing again, Fred?
I did reprint that story in an anthology I did a couple years later, which I think is
the first time he ever reached more than four people with one story.
And he didn't write more, I think, not so much because he didn't get feedback, but
because I don't think he was aware of the existence of magazines to publish the stories.
I don't think Paul Weinbarger, which was his real name, actually read very much science
fiction uniquely among the good writers of science fiction I know.
And it wasn't until editors like Horace Gold and A Little Later Myself began getting after
him and urging him to write that he began producing in volume.
How old was he when he died?
In his middle sixties.
His whole science fiction writing career, except for two stories, occupied about five
years from about 59 to 64, I think it was when he died.
During which time he produced a body of work that has as large a coterie audience as most
writers who were writing for 40 years.
Yeah, well, a lot of that, not all of it, but a lot of it is in print now, fortunately.
And for the first time, his novel, North Australia, Old North Australia, which is a planet not
located on Earth.
North Australia is available in complete form, and it was previously chopped up into pieces
and butchered.
So he's really reaching his maximum audience now.
Kurt Weiner Smith under his real name, Paul Weinbarger, was a specialist in Eastern affairs
for the State Department.
He'd been born, I think, in China and lived there for a long time and spent a lot of time
commuting back and forth.
Last year when I was traveling in Eastern Europe for the State Department, I went to
a particular city where the American ambassador was known to be hostile to all writers and
to science fiction writers in particular.
And when I was introduced to the ambassador, I expected he had a hard time, but it turned
out that he had been a student of Weinbarger's and he mellowed immensely.
Two questions were then posed to the panel.
What book would you most like to be remembered for?
And what book by a colleague do you wish you had written?
Isaac Asimov.
If I'm going to be remembered, it's probably going to be for the Foundation trilogy.
But what I would like to be remembered for is the second part of the Gods themselves.
Because I have frequently been told I don't write any sex and that I don't write any
extraterrestrials and I wanted to show the world I could write about extraterrestrials
and wanted to show them I could write about sex.
So I wrote the second part of the Gods themselves which was completely and 100% about extraterrestrial
sex.
And it was the best extraterrestrials ever anyone ever wrote about and the best extraterrestrial
sex anyone ever wrote about.
And if I have to be asked what story by somebody else I would really like to have written,
it would be Neutron Star by Larry Niven because I once wrote an article about tides and when
I saw this story for which he won a Hugo, I said to myself-
And the Nebula.
And the Nebula, I said to myself my goodness I could have written that story because I
had the entire background in my article and I said to Larry Niven you know I could have
written that story because I had the entire background in the article.
He said I know I read the article that's right.
Frederick Poe.
If I were to choose one story to be engraved on my tombstone, it would have to be a big
tombstone because I'd like to choose three.
There's a short story called Day Million which I wrote so easily and painlessly that I've
always been desperate to recapture that flow of inspiration that came out so quickly and
happily.
There's a novel called The Gold at the Starbow's End and there's a novel not yet published
called Gateway which I think is the best of them all but it's 100,000 words so I don't
know how much of it you can engrave on a tombstone.
As for what other people have written that I wish I had written, there's a lot of H.G.
Wells that I admire immensely.
Novels and short stories that show a sort of ability not just to write well or to write
interestingly but to invent whole new areas of writing.
The time machine is a major invention and I wish I could have written something like
that.
Lester Del Ray.
I find myself in a peculiar position on the second part of this.
As to what I wrote, I don't in the first place expect to be remembered.
Oh, I suppose some of my stuff will be remembered by people who read it while they were very
young until 50 years after I was dead but I really don't think.
If I wanted to be remembered, I wouldn't have picked a somewhat transient feel like science
fiction where your stories inevitably do get out of date sometimes and well your chances
of being remembered by the critics are smaller, used to be smaller than elsewhere.
I'm not writing for the ages, I'm writing for my own pleasure and for the readers of
the day and if they are happy with my things and if I enjoy what I'm doing, sufficient
under the day is the good thereof as well as the evil.
I suppose if I had to pick one story, just one, to be remembered, I'd be torn between
two.
Helen Law in spite of the fact it was my second story and a story I wrote for Fred Pole and
that was for I am a jealous people.
As to somebody else's story I wish I'd written, one small short story by a man named Joseph
Caleum which most people have forgotten called when the eagles gather perhaps.
But generally, I don't feel that way about other writers' work, I'm glad they wrote it,
I enjoy it thoroughly.
I find enough of their individuality in it as a rule that I don't want to.
There is.
Do you remember the last line of that story Lester?
Is that the one that ended about it as a...
No, no, no, that was a McFarlane story you're thinking of.
The story of another man's that I wish I could write has not been written yet.
That consists of the last three books which Isaac Hassamnoff has not written to finish
up his foundation series.
Well, she gave me the right to write.
For the record I never did.
For the record it's in print and on tape that you did.
Which he now, being an Indian giver, has taken back.
It blot!
It blots somebody else's.
Gordon Dixon.
This is a hard thing for me to answer, not because I have any doubt about the answer,
but it's fitting the category.
See, I have absolutely no doubt about what I want to be remembered for.
It's the child's title.
But I am going to have to do the whole Blinken thing to do it.
Because only if I do it right will it turn out to be a structured piece of fiction in
twelve parts.
Running through the historical framework, the contemporary framework, and into the future
fiction framework.
And also of a type that I firmly believe and hope has not been done before that I have
labeled the conscious thematic novel.
So, it will take me fifteen more years to do it and at the end of that time, if I've
done it right it will come out that way and I want to be remembered for it.
As far as I've got a different type of problem in choosing a book that I wish I had written
because I have to sort of grab it random between about a dozen books.
I've already mentioned Arthur's childhoods end.
I picked Paul's Brainwave and I pulled one of my famous blankouts, Jontting.
Alfie Bester.
Alfie's Tiger, Tiger, or Star's My Destination.
Star's My Destination is what I'm thinking of.
But I can go on and name, as I say, eight to ten more.
What I want from each one of them is one particular thing.
See, I'd like to take the ring out of the idols I, or nose here, and you know, steal
the jewel from its gown someplace else, this type of thing.
It's difficult really for anybody, for me at least, and I think for most writers, to
say what story of someone else's he wishes he had written.
There are a lot of stories that are inordinately successful and I wish I had had stories that
successful, which have been one award that I haven't won and so on.
But the only thing any writer has to sell is his own individual personal point of view.
And there would be no way for me to have written Nightfall, or the Foundation series, or Hell in a Law,
or any of the great stories that I've admired so much, because they weren't my stories.
The only stories I know how to write are mine.
Settle for that, Fred. They're pretty good.
I think that is generally true. I think that when we say, I wish I had written that, we do always see one thing in it.
That's near and dear to our heart and we wish we'd had the chance to write the story about that.
Can I end by telling you a little anecdote?
Can we stop you?
No, you can.
Fred Paul and I, Isaac Asimov and Ben Bolver and Gordie Dixon were the few attached ladies.
We're sitting around a single table in Toronto at the World Science Fiction Convention there, a couple years, 73.
Agonizing, he had meal, I remember it well.
Yes, I won the Hugo from the novel and Fred won it for the short story and Ben won it for editorship.
And there they were, a series of Hugo's at the table and we all turned, well at least I turned to Gordie Dixon.
I said, Gordie, you're disgracing us.
And I hung my head.
Yes, you did.
This has been the Valentine Science Fiction Hour.